[Feature] Create a custom link browser tutorial (#2385)
TYPO3-Documentation/TYPO3CMS-Reference-CoreApi: Documentation/ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/CustomLinkBrowser.rst

.. include:: /Includes.rst.txt
.. index:: LinkBrowser; Custom
.. _tutorial-github-link-handler:

============================
Create a custom link browser
============================

> In this tutorial we create a custom link browser tab and the associated

Author: We only create the tab / tab content, not the complete window

> In this tutorial we create a custom link browser tab and the associated

Reviewer: This is not what I meant. The sentence above focused on creating a tab: "In this tutorial we create a custom link browser tab ...". Nope, we create a custom link browser, nor only a tab in backend.

> In this tutorial we create a custom link browser tab and the associated

Author: How would you phrase that?

:ref:`backend link handler <tutorial_backend_link_handler>`.

We create a new tab in the link browser window in the TYPO3 backend:

..  include:: /Images/ManualScreenshots/Backend/CustomLinkBrowser.rst.txt

..  tip::

>     If you want to link to a record in a custom table, configure the

Author: Not sure how to make a positive sentence about this. You need a custom link handler, when the RecordLinkBrowser is not sufficient. Thats why I added the link and the tip

>     If you want to link to a record in a custom table, configure the

Reviewer: Yup, just a remark as you know the docs about link handler better than me. Would be also better in another PR and possibly another doc.

    :ref:`RecordLinkBrowser <TableRecordLinkBrowserTutorials>`. You do not
    need a custom link browser in that scenario.

We introduce a :ref:`custom link format <tutorial-core-link-handler>` to store
the links in this format: `t3://github?issue=123`.

This enables us to edit an existing link in the
link browser or to change parts of the GitHub URI programmatically later.

And we :ref:`render the new link in the frontend <tutorial-typolink-builder>`

> automatically.
> 
> ..  contents::

Author: ```suggestion
automatically.

**Step by step to a custom link browser**

..  contents::
```

    :local:

.. _tutorial_backend_link_handler:

1. Create a link browser tab
============================

> To create a link browser tab we implement the interface

Author: Again we do only create the content of the tab

:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Backend\LinkHandler\LinkHandlerInterface`.

All backend link handlers provided by the Core extend the abstract class
:php:`TYPO3\CMS\Backend\LinkHandler\AbstractLinkHandler`. However, this class is
marked as :php:`@internal` and therefore can be changed by the Core at any time.

You have the choice of implementing the :php:`LinkHandlerInterface` your self
having a look at the :php:`AbstractLinkHandler` for best practices or to extend
the :php:`AbstractLinkHandler`. In the latter case your code might break on
updates though.

In this tutorial we implement the :php:`LinkHandlerInterface` directly as it is
best practice not to rely on internal classes.

You can find the complete class in the extension EXT:examples on GitHub:
`GitHubLinkHandler <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/t3docs-examples/blob/main/Classes/LinkHandler/GitHubLinkHandler.php>`__.

We will explain some of the important methods bellow:

Initialization and dependencies
-------------------------------

..  include:: /ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/_CustomLinkBrowser/_GitHubLinkHandlerInitialize.rst.txt

> For technical reasons not all dependencies needed by the backend link handler can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For technical reasons, not all dependencies needed by the backend link handler can
```

be acquired by :ref:`DependencyInjection`. Therefore the following two methods
are called by Core classes once the dependencies are available:

:php:`LinkHandlerInterface::initialize()` takes care of setting the

> :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Backend\Controller\AbstractLinkBrowserController`, the identifier and

Reviewer: What does the AbstractLinkBrowserController and why it is set?

the configuration information. In this example we only need the configuration,
the other parameters might be needed in different scenarios. The

> :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Core\Page\PageRenderer` has also to be created here for as it

Reviewer: Why is the PageRenderer needed?

Author: to register the JavaScript, see render method. Shall we put this information here as well?

is not possible to inject it at the point of creation of the backend link handler.

> The method :php:`setView()` is called by the :php:`AbstractLinkBrowserController`

Reviewer: Why do we have two views? The one here and the BackendViewFactory view?

once the view is available and contains the necessary information to render
the link browser window.

..  note::
    :php:`setView()` is not part of the :php:`LinkHandlerInterface`

>     and it being called is an implementation detail that might be subject to be

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    and its call is an implementation detail that might be
```

    changed in the future.

Render the link browser tab
---------------------------

The method :php:`LinkHandlerInterface::render()` is called when the tab should
be rendered. It registers the required JavaScript in the page renderer, assigns
variables to the view and returns the rendered HTML.

..  include:: /ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/_CustomLinkBrowser/_GitHubLinkHandlerRender.rst.txt

Set the link via JavaScript
---------------------------

> When the button in the rendered form is clicked to set a link a custom

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the button in the rendered form is clicked to set a link, a custom
```

JavaScript class interprets the form data and creates the link to be stored:

..  todo: Configure code snippet tool to remove or shorten the license comment here

..  include:: /ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/_CustomLinkBrowser/_CustomLinkHandlerJavaScript.rst.txt

It is important that the JavaScript function calls
:js:`LinkBrowser.finalizeFunction()`. Otherwise no link will be set.

> If not done yet the JavaScript has to be registered in the file

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If not done yet, the JavaScript has to be registered in the file
```

:file:`EXT:my_extension/Configuration/JavaScriptModules.php`. Otherwise it
will not be found by :php:`$pageRenderer->loadJavaScriptModule()`.

..  literalinclude:: _CustomLinkBrowser/_JavaScriptModules.php
    :caption: EXT:examples/Configuration/JavaScriptModules.php

> As our JavaScript class depends on classes provided by EXT:backend,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As our JavaScript class depends on classes provided by the backend system extension,
```

This way, it is more obvious that this is provided by TYPO3 itself than some extension.

> :php:`backend` has to be included in the dependencies. See also

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:php:`backend` has to be added as dependency. See also
```

More, what has to be done instead of where. The where is obvious from the snippet.

:ref:`backend-javascript-es6-loading`.

Can we handle this link?
------------------------

The method :php:`LinkHandlerInterface::canHandleLink()` is called when the

> user tries to edit an existing link in the link browser. All backend link handlers will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
user edits an existing link in the link browser. All backend link handlers will
```

> be called and can decide if they can handle that link. If so they should store

Reviewer: ```suggestion
be called and can decide if they can handle that link. If so, they should store
```

> the provided information to be used in rendering (for example to fill an input

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the provided information to be used in rendering (for example, to fill an input
```

Additionally: what rendering?

And I don't understand the example "to fill an input field with the old value". Why should I want to do that? And which field?

field with the old value).

..  include:: /ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/_CustomLinkBrowser/_GitHubLinkHandlerCanHandleLink.rst.txt

Format current URL
------------------

> The function :php:`LinkHandlerInterface::formatCurrentUrl()` is used to preview

Reviewer: "... is used as preview for the link in the backend ..."

> what the link will look like in the backend, for example in the upper part of

Reviewer: ```suggestion
what the link will look like in the backend, for example, in the upper part of
```

> The function :php:`LinkHandlerInterface::formatCurrentUrl()` is used to preview
> what the link will look like in the backend, for example in the upper part of

Author: ```suggestion
The function :php:`LinkHandlerInterface::formatCurrentUrl()` is used as preview 
for the link in the backend, for example in the upper part of
```

Our :ref:`backend link handler implementation from step 1 <tutorial_backend_link_handler>`
saves the link in the custom format `t3://github?issue=123` via JavaScript.

This format is only an arbitrary string until we tell TYPO3 how to handle links
of the new format by a second class which implements the
:php:`TYPO3\CMS\Core\LinkHandling\LinkHandlingInterface`.

..  note::
    There are two interfaces with very similar names and very different
    functionality involved here. The
    :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Backend\LinkHandler\LinkHandlerInterface` renders a tab in
    the link browser window in the backend. Its implementing class is commonly
    called a "(backend) link handler". Classes implementing the interface
    :php:`TYPO3\CMS\Core\LinkHandling\LinkHandlingInterface` handle the
    introduced link format. Such a class is called a "(core) link handler".

..  include:: /ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/_CustomLinkBrowser/_GitHubLinkHandling.rst.txt

The method :php:`LinkHandlingInterface::asString()` creates a string
representation from the parameter array.

> :php:`LinkHandlingInterface::resolveHandlerData()` receives a parsed version of

Reviewer: What does this mean, a parsed version?

the string representation of the link and creates the parameter array from it.

..  _tutorial-typolink-builder:

3. Render the custom link format in the frontend
================================================

The link builder, a class extending the abstract class
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Typolink\AbstractTypolinkBuilder` is called whenever
a link is rendered in the frontend, for example via
TypoScript :typoscript:`.typolink`, by the
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\ContentObject\ContentObjectRenderer::typoLink`
function or by the :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Extbase\Mvc\Web\Routing\UriBuilder`.

..  include:: /ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/_CustomLinkBrowser/_GithubLinkBuilder.rst.txt

The function :php:`AbstractTypolinkBuilder::build()` is called with the link

> configuration and data from the typolink function. If the link can be rendered

Reviewer: ```suggestion
configuration and data from the typolink function. If the link can be rendered,
```

> it returns a new :php:`TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Typolink\LinkResultInterface`. The

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it returns a new :php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Typolink\LinkResultInterface`. The
```

Nope, is does not return an interface, it returns a class implementing the interface.

actual rendering of the link depends on the context the link is rendered in
(for example HTML or JSON).

> If the link cannot be built it should throw an

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the link cannot be built it should throw a
```

> :php:`TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Typolink\UnableToLinkException`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Frontend\Typolink\UnableToLinkException`.
```

the :php:`AbstractLinkHandler`. In the latter case your code might break on
updates though.

In this tutorial, we implement the :php:`LinkHandlerInterface` directly, as it is
best practice not to rely on internal classes.

You can find the complete class in the extension EXT:examples on GitHub:
`GitHubLinkHandler <https://github.com/TYPO3-Documentation/t3docs-examples/blob/main/Classes/LinkHandler/GitHubLinkHandler.php>`__.

We will explain some of the important methods below:

Initialization and dependencies
-------------------------------

..  include:: /ApiOverview/LinkBrowser/Tutorials/_CustomLinkBrowser/_GitHubLinkHandlerInitialize.rst.txt

For technical reasons, not all dependencies needed by the backend link handler can
be acquired by :ref:`DependencyInjection`. Therefore the following two methods
are called by Core classes once the dependencies are available:

:php:`LinkHandlerInterface::initialize()` takes care of setting the
:php:`\TYPO3\CMS\Backend\Controller\AbstractLinkBrowserController`, the identifier and
the configuration information. In this example we only need the configuration,
the other parameters might be needed in different scenarios.

> :php:`AbstractLinkBrowserController  $linkBrowser`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:php:`AbstractLinkBrowserController $linkBrowser`
```

    Is the surrounding class calling the link handler. This class stores

>     configuration information on the complete link browser window.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    configuration information of the complete link browser window.
```

:php:`string $identifier`
    Contains the key of the page TSconfig configuration of the link browser tab
    this instance renders.

> :php:`string[] $configuration`

Reviewer: I suspect, string[] is not correct. Valid page TSconfig may be:

[
    'some_key' => 'some_value'
]

which is equivalent to `array<string, string>`, but also `array<string, array<string, string>>` is valid.

But string[] means:

[
    'some_value'
]

> :php:`string[] $configuration`

Author: ```suggestion
:php:`array $configuration`
```

>     Contains the array of the page TSconfig configuration of the link browser tab

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Contains the page TSconfig configuration as array of the link browser tab
```
